Let's explore the key responsibilities and processes
of the portfolio management office.
The portfolio management office is similar in a way
to the project management office, except it is on steroids.
That is it is tackling very large and complex company initiatives
and we will look at six key activities of the PMO.
The first, initiative demand management.
The PMO will manage initiative planning and prioritization
and the projects and programs within each.
Governance, establishment of initiative management policies.
Then execute the initiatives via projects programs and operations,
on time and on budget.
Define and maintain standards metrics and process for the
running of the PMO office and its activities.
Perform cross-functional reporting and communication.
Now effective communication is even more important.
You need to communicate from the CxO offices and throughout the entire company.
Maximize the company's investment dollar.
Basically that's one of the main goals of the PMO.
To get the greatest bang, business value for the buck.
For your investment dollar.
Now we'll cover each responsibility in detail in the next few slides.
Demand management we already covered in quite detail the demand management
process in the role the portfolio management office plays.
So as not to be repetitive,
please review the module constructing your demand management process and
also check out the sections demand sources in the PMO,
where the demand typically came from the Board of Directors,
Steering Groups, senior executives and business leaders.
Also the section grooming for initiatives.
We discussed there how you select the right initiatives to be
in your backlog and lastly the section, initiative-driven Project Backlog.
To me the most critical,
important and strategic project should be initiative-driven.
Sure there will be projects coming from operations or other parts of the
organizations based on your demand resource thresholds,
but this is where the most high value projects should likely originate.
So feel free to check out that module in the reference sections.
Let's define the term governance before we talk about the PMO governance.
Governance is the establishment of policies and continuous
monitoring of their proper implementation by the members of a
governing body of an organization,
with the goal of enhancing the prosperity and viability of the organization.
The goal of having governance basically is also to maximize investment value.
This would apply to for-profit businesses certainly.
Also for example governance for a company maybe to not only
maximize profits but be environmentally friendly.
Ensure there is community outreach and provide extraordinary employee benefits,
all while maximizing the investment value.
Now let's see how this applies to the PMO.
The portfolio management office governance is comprised of the following areas.
A formal procedure to review initiatives and projects,
approve, those are funding decisions,
submitted project proposals and business case changes.
As well as to rationalize the investment portfolio.
Clear lines of responsibility and accountability for the technical and
financial performance of the initiatives and projects.
Also the PMO will use a consistent set of policies to
guide the development of estimates, cost benefits et cetera,
to assess progress and to manage initiatives and projects.
Every project has a senior business manager or
sponsor who oversees the initiatives, oversees the project definitions,
budgets and takes responsibility for their success.
Now let's talk about the initiative management activities.
Initiative Management Process, this is where the main work gets done.
Develop and maintain initiatives and projects.
The executive team will regularly identify new initiatives
and projects and add them to the backlog.
Manage an inventory of current initiatives and their projects
and the investments being made in them, such as people and funding.
Categorize ongoing initiatives and projects and show value
for your investments or lack of value.
In the case where value is not where the executives expect it,
you may delay and rethink that initiative and any associated projects,
or you may terminate and redeploy resources to more strategic
initiatives and projects or launch new ones.
Regular and timely reviews.
The executive governance body meets once a quarter to perform the
backlog grooming as we discussed in the demand module but also to
review the metrics from running projects,
programs and operational activities and to make the hard decisions.
For the PMO to work you need to have standards, metrics and a process in place.
When the governance team is established in the policies of the PMO.
They are deciding and requiring what standards to have,
what metrics to collect and what to report.
So you need to gather metrics by initiative and project.
You need a very structured and clear process by which to
gather metrics for all launched projects.
The PMO office will work closely with the initiative owners and
project managers ensuring the right data and metrics are captured
and provided back into the portfolio office.
You need guidelines for presenting initiative and project
proposals for ranking and selection.
This is important,
since it'll be the gatekeeper as to what initiatives and
projects are even considered for the backlog.
Guidelines for the initiative and project selection criteria.
As you know from this course these guidelines are critical for the PMO success.
Remember we are striving to be only doing the right work not just any work.
Repository for financial and resource usage and allocation.
You want to know what was allocated and what was used,
and what value came of it.
You need guidelines of what if capabilities to explore alternatives.
Just because an initiative OF a project was presented you must also look closely
at any alternatives looking for synergies and cost savings,
and certainly some tools.
Hopefully automated tools will support all these activities.
Figure out your process in general before you buy any of your tools of course.
Then figuring what you want to do for your PMO will in fact be the
requirements that you can use to help you select your tools.
On the next slide we'll see how to get the word out.
Communicate, communicate and communicate.
Let's suppose you're heading up the PMO,
here are the communication activities you'll need to do.
You need to communicate the PMO process and rationale,
I would suggest a wiki or website and face-to-face presentations.
You need to facilitate the discussions that drive
project candidates and grooming.
No one will naturally know how to do this.
As well as you'll be following your selection criteria.
You need to provide the interface between the PMO and the boots on
the ground with the project and program managers.
You need to promote the use of tools and dashboards.
These offer great communication vehicles and enable you to roll up large
amounts of data and get a bird's-eye view of things.
Remember tools did not make decisions for you,
but help you make better decisions.
You need to speak in both worlds.
At the project level as a project manager we're used to
communicating key items to management as a measure of whether
the project is progressing successfully.
These are important and provide a gauge of the project's health,
but they don't really reflect the project's true impact on the business,
which is what execs are looking for.
With executives you need to focus on the terms that
reflect how the project is contributing to the larger set
of objectives of the enterprise, that is the initiatives.
Here you want to focus on organizational benefits,
revenue, return on investments rather than costs.
Projects typically focus on costs and the resources consumed,
and lastly consider each person you communicate with.
Try to speak in their language.
Think about how that person gets measured and views success.
Then you can design your communication for each person or audience.
This approach and the things included in each communication event with an
audience should be documented and part of the governance process,
and any of these presentations should be captured on the
website of the wiki as well for future use.
You're always trying to maximize the company's investment dollar.
Basically that is one of the main goals of the PMO.
To get the greatest bang for the buck, of course.
Now for each project, for each initiative.
Review investment metrics actuals and targets that you
defined via the governance process.
For example has revenue increased?
How much and did it meet the target?
Have cost decreased?
You also need look at subjective criteria such as has quality improved?
Again how much and did it meet the target?
Based on the metrics feedback you may need to reallocate resources,
pause or stop projects or start new projects with the freed up resources. Now let's discuss the PMOs workflow in the next section.